---
title: 'Minervas Owl'
description: 'Short story chapter written by Luke Rabbitte'
pubDate: 'Sep 03 2022'
heroImage: '/koi_pond-min.jpeg'
---

Cycling into the Philosopher's Garden, backtracking our rental bikes and rucksacks off track uphill to the still seat of germination, nations race as we beat the drift of sleep in the deep light-trick of safety. We read the ivy-choked stonemasonry, wizen on the Budapest-admiring bench, hoodwink the shrinking streets, Minerva út. Green lawns with no dogs allowed, white cloud overhead, old red town. Twenty years in one, the colours of dustless life. Stems breaking through the soft sand. Hot pavements downtrodden. Stopping but knowing when best again to get going. Holidaying Irish rocking and swaying, Fontaines D.C I Love You playing. I love you even when you're out of reach, a steep staircase, run-for-your-life chase. You're always one train away. Walking the walk of a mutineer at the Fisherman's Bastion. Life is a dream that is happening right here.

Eyes still Switzerland-smokestung we cry blue tears at a grand piano, Bartók Béla út, within the back of our heads. Music playing in every situation, the bells the Kuhglocken Cloches de Vache ringing through thick sonic landscape darkening scythe cut grass on the sides of middle we hike tightly, lightening our sleepwalking logic wide of Augstmatthorn. Rising past teenage air it broods on the adult world. A wide continent of language. Caught between the rain in tent-porches and trains. In an overcast staring contest in day-hot air indispersible until at last - the night recoils, each part a wave to rock a boiling ocean, the air voiding into the mechanism, the sea dries up the deranged face of the earth. The face of your mother punched down into the dirt. Ticking clocks muten stunning blue club lighting, cold electricity bares Interlaken by its poor environs to a morbid mockup of daytime - shockblue catastrophe. A town asleep in the snug recess of the valley, unknowingly seized. Widescreen, boatless mutiny winnowing the corpselike trees as we get freezing by degrees.

Europe has everything. It has empty engagements - parties for every generation, auburn-haired children, modern lifestyle, limping, pained vision in cavedrawings, unhorned bell-adorned cows, sunshine recorders and small weird numbers forming, beauty and business in rapport, eyes flickering to the prosceniums, sport, framing draughty performance, love locked to bridges, impotable coin-blocked fountains, sapience in public space, bikes to cycle into them, the modern malaise, non-conforming, insatiate gameplays simulcast, softwood cultural beams, prepossessing front-facing building, whirring, stirring, ibex dancing on Tethys Seabone, debris drying out across aeons, thinking in the inky night in Chamonix au fond, eating stale bread on a thawing glacier beyond for a crumbless living, falling into existence.

Europe has Messonghi Beach, Bóthar Bhaile an Araltaigh, the vast throw of Rosenthal, the Derwent linen mill in Derby, the Round Tower at Ardmore, skeletons in its dirt, blood to its head, the Northeast Passage, lava stained islands, sideways explanations.

Winking headlights fill the loping backroads. Hoping our way across ice. Throwing ourselves around unrecommended bends. Cathedral quality peaks unarranged, there and there they stay. Strangeness in its silent making, the quietness of age. Absentia makes sense, at great expense. At Rhodes hopping between foot and foot of the wide throughput and wondering where memories go. Sitting crosslegged on the train to Vienna, angel playing dry rhythm bones in Babylon. Thirsty at the watering hole, thinking like a cavepainting coerced, like a frieze-figure from Halicarnassus headfirst. Notebook by a river, humming European verse across the universe.