---
title: 'What is True Randomness?'
description: 'Blog post written by Luke Rabbitte'
pubDate: 'Apr 30 2021'
heroImage: '/newyork.jpeg'
---

As almost a third of English words do, "random" stems from Old French.
However, the original noun "random" had a meaning closer to "speed" or
"impetuosity". Over time the sense of haste embedded in the word wrought
new meanings like "careless", "unforeseen", and ultimately the sense we
accept today -- that of something bizarre, unplanned, or strange. 

Random is a useful word. It peppers our everyday conversations,
emphasising the sheer craziness, excitement and unpredictability of our
lives, and seems to just roll off the tongue when talking about those
moments where, for example, the author of a randomness article randomly
began by talking about English etymology, or the fact that he has
randomly interrupted this article to shuffle into the third person. 

However, true randomness is far rarer than the everyday usage of the
word leads us to expect. Pulling short straws, rolling dice, flipping
coins -- these are some of the many time-tested methods used to generate
randomness and preside over fair contests. Ignoring irregularities of
the sort discovered by researchers at the Akademia Podlaska in Eastern
Poland, who claimed the embossed design on the Belgian €1 coin causes
the coin to land on heads more so than tails, we can take it as given
that a single coin flip is random. We know intuitively, though, that
while one coin flip is random, many coin flips become predictable and
will tend towards a fairly even 50/50 split.

So, how well does our intuition serve us when it comes to other puzzles
of probability? Were you really listening in maths class? How well-based
are your assumptions? The truth is -- maybe less so than you thought. 

Consider the following scenario. 22 people have signed up to a new
Probability and Statistics module and are walking into the tutorial room
on campus for the first time, oblivious that after a single class their
brains will have melted and oozed out onto the linoleum floor. The
teaching assistant strolls through the door once all the students are
done filing in, bringing the room count to 23. What are the odds that a
pair of people in the room share the same birthday? The bemused students
shuffle around the room, perhaps approaching the problem by organising
into January rows, February rows, etc. Soon, they discover that the odds
are not as long as they originally thought -- in fact, virtually the
same odds as flipping a (non-Belgian?!) €1 coin and watching it land on
heads. How can this be?

From a group of 23 people, there are in fact 23C2 possible pairs -- 253
pairs, to be clear. This turns out to be well over half the amount of
days in a year -- 182.5 or 183. Mathematically, it is easier to
calculate the probability that two people don't share the same birthday,
and then subtract this from 1 to find the probability that they do. Back
in our stuffy room, the teaching assistant grabs a student at random and
asks them what their birthday is. Ignoring leap years, this student has
the luxury of 365 options, as they are the first to be asked. Moving on
to the next student, they still of course have 365 possible birthdays,
but if they don't want to break the not-having-the-same-birthday streak,
they must not repeat the first birthday and thus have 364 options.
Moving on again, the students are getting a bit impatient, but after
asking everyone in the room and crunching the numbers ( 365⁄365 × 364
⁄365 × ... × 343 ⁄365 ), then subtracting this number from 1, we find
that the chance of any two people in the room sharing a birthday is in
fact 0.507297, or just over 50%. Repeat the experiment in a larger
lecture hall of 70 people, and the odds soar to 99.9%. Try it yourself! 

This sort of confusion arises from several irreducible human factors.
Over many tens of thousands of years, the human brain has learned that
the best way to deal with the stunning amount of information presented
by our surroundings is to make predictions and seek patterns. The brain
is upset by pattern-devoid input. As the Ganzfeld experiment famously
shows, participants who sit in a comfortable chair for half an hour with
halved ping-pong balls over their eyes and a constant red light shone
towards them, with nothing but white noise playing out through their
headphones, will have starved their brains of patterns for just enough
time to undergo mild hallucination. Sensory stimulation is like oxygen
to the human brain; the confiscation of this basic need is what makes
solitary confinement such a malevolent method of punishment and what
makes people shock themselves rather than sit idle in a room (as
entertainingly demonstrated in Michael Stevens' Pain vs Boredom
experiment uploaded to one of YouTube's most popular science channels,
Vsauce). 

The pendulum, however, swings both ways. Input that is indecipherably
random can be as jarring as no input at all. Comedians like Andy Kaufman
and Eric André consciously challenge the threshold at which something
passes from the hilarious into the haphazard -- leaving punchlines
undelivered, flitting between personalities, or even walking onto a
crowded New York subway wearing pyjamas and an Elizabethan dog collar,
pouring milk everywhere and eating Froot Loops (looking at you, Mr
André). The greatest works of art successfully toe this line between
structure and disarray, forte and piano, action and inaction. They
strike the optimum balance in our brains -- enough pattern to satisfy
and enough randomness to subvert. 

When we hit shuffle on our music library, we expect a roundabout trip
through discographies, eras, and genres, and can be left frustrated if
five songs from the same artist come up in a row. After complaints from
begrudged customers, iTunes decided to alter their shuffle function for
this very reason, "making it less random to make it feel more random",
in the words of erstwhile CEO Steve Jobs. Of course, a random system
with such a large user base can be reasonably expected to serve up an
oddly specific string of similar content from time to time -- for
example, with over 120 billion videos on YouTube, it is not that
surprising that one random broadcast snippet from a Greek radio show
contains the word "Hello" in its randomly generated URL.

"Rolling dice and flipping coins are serviceable means of generating
randomness, but when it comes to national sweepstakes, data encryption,
drug screening, military drafts, and university entrance lotteries we
obviously need to seek out the highest quality, crème de la crème
randomness." 

 All this is to say that what looks random to the human eye often isn't.
The odds of showing 3, 1, 6, 4, 5, and 2 upon six rolls of a die is the
exact same as the odds of showing 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, despite the
former looking a lot more random. Genuine randomness is hard for us to
understand. An experiment carried out by Dr Christopher Wetzel of the
Rhodes College Department of Psychology asked participants to create a
list of 100 coin flip results from thin air, and to make the results
seem as random as possible. Subsequent analysis showed that humans are
surprisingly incapable of behaving randomly. It's not that we as humans
lack the imagination; more often than not, we will actually
overcompensate. We will create chaotic lists that flit around
unpredictably, just like the roundabout iTunes shuffle that sounded more
pleasantly random to our ears. True randomness, like serving up those
five Bob Marley songs in a row, will occasionally hit a "run" of similar
results, creating an illusion of order that contradicts our
understanding of randomness.

The subtle difference between chaos and randomness has lain at the heart
of the debate of what counts as true randomness. Rolling dice and
flipping coins are serviceable means of generating randomness, but when
it comes to national sweepstakes, data encryption, drug screening,
military drafts, and university entrance lotteries such as those used by
the Irish Central Applications Office (which must sometimes revert to
randomly selecting new entrants among equally qualified candidates), we
obviously need to seek out the highest quality, crème de la crème
randomness. 

Computers, to begin with, are terrible at producing truly random
numbers. Most programming languages rely on Pseudo-Random Number
Generators (PRNGs), which vary in implementation but rely on formulae
and algorithms to produce strings of random numbers. The trouble is,
these formulae are deterministic and require a term zero or seed to get
the ball rolling. From this starting point, the same subsequent
randomness will always be reproduced. They are also periodic, in that
the sequence of random numbers will eventually repeat itself. Dr Mads
Haahr, founder of Random.org, identifies simulation and modelling as
suitable use cases for PRNGs, owing to their efficiency. However, to
acquaint computers with true randomness, we must get them to listen to
external phenomena.

True Random Number Generators (TRNGs) are the sort of computer systems
we must use if we want the fairest and highest quality randomness
demanded by some of the lottery and encryption situations mentioned
earlier. A popular approach is to observe large-scale, chaotic systems.
In fact, Random.org uses this very approach -- the service is based on
randomness generated by atmospheric noise, which is picked up by radios
and is caused by all sorts of natural phenomena, including
thunderstorms. If you have ever been foolish enough to hinge your plans
on the suggestions of the weatherman, you'll realise that despite truly
awe-inspiring leaps in technology over the past few decades, weather
forecasts still get it spectacularly wrong. If you wanted to know
exactly what the weather was going to do over the coming days and weeks,
you would have to know the position and status of every single molecule
in the earth's atmosphere at any given moment in time, and extrapolate
into the future based on a set of laws that describes nature predictably
100% of the time. A quote from French polymath Pierre-Simon Laplace
deserves to be reproduced in full: 

"We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its
past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment
would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of
all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast
enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single
formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those
of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain
and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes."  

At a time when solar eclipses and planetary movements can be accurately
predicted hundreds and even thousands of years into the future, you
could be led to believe the scientific cause has been edging ever closer
to such an overarching "intellect". However, if such an intellect truly
existed, we would not only know whether or not we ought to wear our
wellies and raincoat when we leave the house tomorrow morning, but for
the morning after as well, and the morning after that, and, well, every
morning ever until the sun stops rising. 

Back to iTunes -- where previously the dice had been rolled afresh
between every song, the new system that Steve Jobs was going on about
took a starting point, or "seed" song, and generated the entire playlist
there and then, determining from the beginning what song would be the
10th, 20th, or 30th, in the list, for instance. If the universe were
truly deterministic, as if someone pressed play on a certain song at the
exact moment of the Big Bang and everything that has ever happened since
has been the slow shuffle through a predetermined playlist, then nothing
could ever be truly "random". The atmospheric noise providing randomness
for Random.org must have come from somewhere. 

Perhaps if we could find the butterfly that beat its wings somewhere
halfway across the globe, the little "seed" that triggered the series of
whispers, breezes, winds, gales, and storms that caused the atmospheric
noise in the first place, we could open up Random.org in front of a
friend and gobsmack them by accurately predicting every next number that
came up on the screen. Yet, when we are talking about such chaotic
systems as the weather, we know the odds of anyone ever being able to do
this are vanishingly small, so it is safe to say these numbers are about
as bloody random as it is going to get. 

Some, however, prefer to peer closer and look at the seemingly random
behaviour of electrons and other subatomic particles. Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle tells us that there are some things about these
minute particles that can never be truly known -- the corresponding
position and momentum of a particle at any given moment in time, for
example -- and implies that it is not always possible to predict the
value of a quantity or the behaviour of a subatomic particle with full
certainty, even if we did possess Laplace's "intellect" and knew the
precise starting conditions. As with many questions of quantum
mechanics, the jury is still very much out on this one -- Einstein
himself was sceptical of true randomness and tried reaching around for
proof of a deterministic universe, maintaining that "God does not play
dice".' 

"Although the belief that everything unfolds from the whims of
omniscient, bloodthirsty deities has gone a bit out of fashion over the
years, the relentless search for meaningful patterns seems to be as much
a preoccupation of the human mind as ever."

The question is whether this behaviour, along with others, is truly
random, or whether we simply have not glimpsed the underlying pattern
yet. There was a time when someone who claimed that on 7 September 2993,
there would be a solar eclipse for exactly 5 minutes and 33 seconds
would have been laughed out of the room, sent to a psychiatric hospital,
or worse. But hundreds of years of scientific enquiry later and here we
are. Human civilisations have been obsessed with randomness, for better
or for worse, for as long as we can tell. Surviving Roman frescoes show
men playing at dice, and examinations of hordes of ancient cultures
reveal the very human obsession with the determinism debate, manifested
in ritual sacrifice and offerings, art and sacred texts, and the
reverence laid upon oracles, prophets, and seers. 

Although the belief that everything unfolds from the whims of
omniscient, bloodthirsty deities has gone a bit out of fashion over the
years, the relentless search for meaningful patterns seems to be as much
a preoccupation of the human mind as ever. In 1898, American author
Morgan Robertson released a novella entitled Futility, within which he
introduces an enormous, 800-foot long vessel named Titan, the largest of
its day. As the Titan progresses through the North Atlantic in
mid-April, it hits an iceberg and, carrying only the minimum legal quota
of lifeboats, many of the passengers are doomed to an icy death.
Fourteen years later, and firmly outside the domain of fiction, the RMS
Titanic sets sail across the North Atlantic, destined for Newfoundland.
The ship is 882ft long, the largest of its day. Tragically, the ship
hits an iceberg in mid-April and, carrying only the bare minimum quota
of lifeboats, proceeds to sink into the midnight depths, dooming all but
the most blindly fortunate passengers to an icy death. 

On such a large playing field as the earth, such bizarre coincidences
will of course eventually happen, just like how the word "hello" can be
reasonably expected to be nestled in the random URL of at least one of
those 120 billion videos on YouTube. Morgan Robertson is no more or less
prescient than your neighbour down the road boasting that it was their
superior knowledge and insight that led them to bet on the winning horse
at the races last weekend, rather than blind, startling luck. 

So, take a moment to pause and question yourself the next few times you
throw around the word "random". True randomness is not bizarre, wacko,
out of the blue, unplanned, or strange. It is just random. That's it.
Trying to look further into it, to take it in your hands and declare
dominion over it is a fruitless exercise. That being said, what is
fruitless can still be revelatory. Gazing into the abyss and seeing
little fictions unfold is as strong an affirmation of your humanity and
the power of your pattern-hungry brain as you will likely ever
experience. True randomness is neither beautiful nor ugly, neither
predictable nor chaotic, neither provocative nor banal, neither jarring
nor soothing, neither human nor robot, and it is for precisely these
reasons that you ought to be more in awe when you come across it.
