---
title: 'Interlaken'
description: 'Short story chapter written by Luke Rabbitte'
pubDate: 'Aug 04 2022'
heroImage: '/interlaken.jpeg'
---

Ducks in a midnight cauldron floating. Received on the field of reeds. There is no moss here, paperlike shoots the colour of yellow midsummer flutter here. The river is three dimensional tonight, paradise of life slipping along sloping dirt in Interlaken. Silver water. In the broad sun of late afternoon we shattered the silver water and it has been one reckless queue all day. Knowing the phenomenon by its visitors. All pay less heed, possess one less feck than the next. Slug leaves swirl pitifully – all washed up from the ditch. Above the brim of a book I see this old reality. A swim in a brook. As in a brokerage firm back home passing handshakes from one cool palm to the next. A collection, a taskforce, an accountancy of eels slid through the noon flue earlier. Goods in transit: bien-être.

Geography unfolds itself in textbook perfection. Things are elegantly spaced, not scraping the valley walls but keeping themselves at a distance. Everything stamped under the hot sun's brand was loosening cooling. There is one road out. People throw parcels over the mountainshoulders. Everything is expensive. Affairs managed all day in a stranger's language. In a gruelling bid to understand all the day, no interest at intervals. This and that were polar prosodies, they hadn't the Irish pathos. Had only not to scrape curling offcuts, skin thin deal film from the classroom desktop to have held a icecream's chance in Strasbourg, France, at a glance listening and learning. A song glances his mind's ear. Strasbourg St. Denis, dipping into the glee and rowdy-keyed memory from history. How the paltry relic begs its recollections.

Commanding blue of the water rollcalling in unison all controllable subjects. A blanket of sibilance rolling away persuasively – “come along! whether you’d like it or not!” Jumpworthy skin of the water, now the ducks skim its pallid surface. Captureworthy arc of the day. Documentable sliver of living. They point granitewards to the mountain from milky blue water. There are villages underneath, as well. The grand concourse. Quiet in the artery. An industrial mirage, copped in the image of the petroleum shimmers of home. A toy galley sealed from the world, a ship behind bottleneck uncorked. Money in the slip-of-paper ships, people hedging against brilliance in the sombre air. Flies that fly down riverspider way to die. Fish that skyward shimmer. « Est-ce qu'il est profond ? » Slug leaves, horsehairs, foodcrumbs. Not a single can. Faare from the Liffey. Helloe stranger river.

Stubenhocker on his holidays. What was it he had seen in die Bäckerei? Ahah, ah yes. Potato hell. Ahah. What happened to the Irishman? Hell is bright. Where do we go from here? Look up to the blueing sky. Mountainscapular shapes soar relentlessly. Imagesearing, wayfaring strangers. The contrast lessens at night. A bivvi under the cold fan of its knifeblade ridge. Ah yes. A night hike. A sleeping bag advertisement. Take your first serious steps in the outdoors. Young man. A young dream, a mote of dust in a sunbeam.

The streets of Grindelwald had been creeping with people. Oversleeping bread-fed people up for their daily at noon. We had spoken too soon, splayed our cards on the table prostrate and fate said to send us back the train to the lakes. And here we stayed. To everything its place. Ten four timing. Counting out Sondheim beats by the Irish Sea. Magic in those cadences. Feeling in those words. Gone the way of Mícheál Ó Súilleabháin. Tossed the lot of Daniel Dumile. Ten eight timing. Tapping into the first cold feeling of scientific winter, the morning bell pealing. Weaponfashioners of soul. Congruency they never knew. Comhrochtana yes, swapping their morningstar worlds from plates apart. Yes, they lift our pens by force. Rather a penwielder than sealshielder be. Never to stamp your name. Midfielder’s game toggling a packet of bodies there and back and there and back again arís and arís eile. Conveying the reasons for defence to the attackers. Without them there would be a lot less to save. Mountains another day. Whistlesharp blades of rock balefully defending the border, to defend the people’s right below to lie awake in longing meadows, warm their limbs in slow repose. This night scene is elegant but I am no cartographer, mapping in such bare detail the aquatic thoroughfare I go spare. Less detail less to save. Warm river cooperating through two lakes. Passing through I am between two youths. I wonder what my family would do.

Sometimes you’re somewhere and feel nowhere. Sandymount Strand: turning my cricked neck west to east, an eon of sea bulging black, nothing waving back. Running onwards into the pisstaking night. Legs of noise and stunning blunt pain running on. A binbag windbreaker sagging on the chest and shorts' dye bleeding. The die is cast. There and there and there again and all I want is to come back. Running into a diversifying, shapeless wasteland written in free verse – what an awful ending to the universe!

I am stuck in Interlaken, in fathomless Interlaken, wetting my feet in the sentient parade, the afterparty of one lake and the stirring of another. Better to skim the horizontal day or stay vertical at night? Discussing this with my friends around a fire. It has paid to force myself to be strategic. The amount of unsolved to-do lists. Tasks that choke through time as I knaw through mine. The wizened hulks on top-heavy logs on sizeable sticks on tremoring twigs on top of tissue. Chewing through knotty fibre and spitting out char, snapcrackling. Campfire smoke flaying its tendrils in our ringspun jumpers. Ecstasy to be with friends in the world. Can never be created nor destroyed. Longing for things to take less long than I think. Spittling madman energy in blowing it all aflame. The sort that bores the reader. Incredible effort put into everything. We are intertia cursed lunks smokestunk, wet to the skins and cold skeletons beneath. A certain scapular, rucksack-haulier pain. Longing for the list to diminish on this brutal finish. Things end in a pile, in the deep silence of the hills there is difficulty in compartmentalising. Everything in its right place. Snapping a stick in half and the wood is splintergiving and inconvenient. There are no clean breaks here. Packaged meat wrappers are filled with ants, discarded and supremely irritating thoughtless things wilting. We had a bit too much city food to eat. Now, here, we are crosslegged in spiritual lag, one empty face, one talking head regarding the next. Waiting for ourselves to eat up. Ith do cuid. Young sleepingbagless man, it is time to take your first steps in the outdoors.

Cosmic handwriting across the escalades. Moonlight on the river and me in my own spitting image. Watching him fade away. From the smallest stream that sprung a leak into two watery eyes, watchers of the world, and me between. Interlaken. A fluffeyed duckling cawks motherward. More inclined to wonder than to understanding, as all great conversationalists should be. A bit of panic in the upper ribcage, the occasional floodwash keeps these arteries wide. They are learning how to want, spinning blissful in a silver river. Helloe fellowed things. A wibbly rock underfoot shakes me into their caution. Them drifting and me standing by. The power to play God.

Interlaken.

This world was a surprise and so be the next.