---
title: 'What Does Your Soul Look Like?'
description: 'Short story chapter written by Luke Rabbitte'
pubDate: 'Sep 30 2022'
heroImage: '/interlaken.jpeg'
---

The planets are bright, the constellations studious. Greek beer on the tongue. Swimming out to meet it halfway. Water rushing in and out of ears, vacant black water in our porches. Not a white horse nor cow in sight, far from the land of milk but still a darkened handshaped scrape from the milky way. Surroundings toggled on and off in a handshake. Stakes rising up from today supporting tomorrow, a bockety jetty walked over the warm water.

Starcrossing, wandering matrix overhead. Growing old into crusty coursing meteors orbiting fussed over planets. Here is the place we'll grow old. Us friends, we are growing to be green and purple stripes, coral in the sky with quarreling diamonds. A memory factory; yielding our expectations we are surprised at the output. Youth looks better in retrospect. Filial love. Deep blue fish in a French aquarium. Like two dories, like two twitching clay figurines playing hide and seek faking like it's that easy to be found. Children's games peeled back to their pith over generations. Spinning on our feet in a freshly cut field until we fall stainbound on the grass. The pressure drops at night, the lowing of cows carried on a rising wind. First time organising things, zipping up your winter coat, baffled to keep anything in place. The bedsides you cried at. A lino floored wood effect bedroom with a metal locker containing a single copy of Patrick Kavanagh's Selected Poems. Dexterous reality slicing across every page, convincing illusion of being there. Feet plunging into clay. From here, sitting on this gate, to Dublin city gasping breathless between two grasping working waterways. I lit afire cities sitting gatewise; I don't feel like I ever moved. I don't feel like I ever grew up; a gate sitter swinger of legs barely scraping a toe on this earth. Pictures of a son beheld by his parents, an album dedicated to inheritance. Hindsight biased, they took us out of the dark. Holding hands as things flatten from spiderweb night-time into calm day. The flexing sun arcs back, it's getting hotter. Yellow ochre clay pot stopper. The last thought of the day.

The first hour the most honest of all. Waking up a clean head, an empty palace. Running the marble floor with our clipclop footsteps, the gentle percussion hitting the vast ceilings. Nobody home. In an empty melting palace in the sea. No matter how far there's always further. Filing stars retire home, vehicles in space crashing into earth's oceans. I have water for my journey. Gazing outward inward. Fáinne geal an lae, again and again, halcyon going on and on and on.